Introduction to Charts
We'll give an overview of several different types of charts and visualizations and discuss how they can be used to tell a story.
Let's begin by looking at a line chart when comparing different but related datasets.
Line chart
A line chart is a great way to display the information. They are able to display trends and show how a data value is changing in 
relation to a continuous variable. 
For example, if time is a continuous variable, how has the sale of a product or multiple products changed? 

Pie charts
This type of chart can show the breakdown of an entity into its sub-parts and the proportion of
the subparts in relation to one another. Each portion of the pie represents a static value or category, and the sum of all categories 
is equal to a 100 percent.
In this example, we have a Marketing Campaign with four distinct categories. Social Sites, Native Advertising, 
Paid Influencers, and Live Events. With this type of data representation, we can easily see the total number of leads generated per 
category. We now look at one of the most commonly used charts.

The Bar Chart
This type of chart is the most common as they are easy to create and are great for comparing related data sets or parts of a whole.
For example, in this bar chart, we can see the population numbers of different countries and how they compare to one another.
We can also use stacked bars in which each bar is divided into sub bars that are stacked end to end. In this stacked bar, 
we can see the population of each country split into four age ranges. 
Would you like the graph to appear vertical and not horizontal? Then column charts would be a great pick. This type of chart can be used 
quite effectively to show change over time and to compare values side-by-side. For example, showing page views versus user's session 
time on a website as it changes on a month-to-month basis. While this type of chart looks similar to a bar chart, they cannot always 
be used interchangeably. For example, a column chart may be better suited for showing negative and positive values.

Treemaps
which are useful for displaying complex hierarchies using nested rectangles. In this example, 
the treemap depicts statewide employment rates within the population of a country over the last year. The size of the rectangle 
represents the population and the color represents the employment rate. We can click on any region to see the employment data of
the sub-regions within the selected region. Trying to display a pipeline or different stages of a continuous process.

Funnel charts 
In this example, the funnel chart is showing the conversion rate at each stage of the sales process from
lead generation to the final sale. 

Another exceptional chart is the scatter chart. In this type of chart, the circle colors represent the categories of data and 
the circle sizes are indicative of the volume of data.
For example, in this scatter chart, we can see each product line by the number of units sold and the revenue it brings. 
A scatter chart can be great for revealing trends, clusters, patterns, and correlations between data points. 

Bubble charts This is a variant of scatter charts, and they are useful for comparing a handful of categories to one
another in terms of relative significance. 
For example, understanding areas of significant expenditure in an organization's sales budgets.

Lastly, we have sparklines
Sparklines do not include an axis or coordinates, yet they display trends simply and effectively. These are great for showing the 
general trend of a variation.
For example, stock market price fluctuations from the opening to the closing of a trading day. We learned about the 
importance of charts and how they are able to shape our data to provide meaningful information. We will dive into
more details about how to create and configure different types of charts in Excel.


we’ll look at how to create a few basic types of charts in Excel. We’ll first create line charts, then pie charts, and lastly, 
bar charts.

First let’s start with line charts. A line chart is a type of graph, used to show information as a series of data points
connected by straight lines. In a line chart, the horizontal axis typically represents time or a similar category, 
and the vertical axis typically represents numerical values. Because line charts can display continuous data over a given time period, 
they're perfect for showing trends in data at equal time intervals, such as days, months, quarters, or years. Line charts are ideal 
for scenarios where you have data that’s arranged in columns or rows, or where your data contains multiple data series. 
On the car_sales worksheet of the Car Sales workbook, let’s first filter the data to display only Ford car models.

Now let’s create a line chart with this data. We’ll select the data from 2 non-adjacent columns, in this case “Model” and “Price”.
Then we select Line chart from the 2-D Line category of the Charts group.

Let’s change the chart title to “Price of Ford Cars”, which we can do by simply double-clicking the chart title textbox, and
editing the text. We now see a floating chart area containing our line chart, which displays the price trend of Ford cars across 
its models. Let’s move this line chart to the left side of the worksheet below our data.

OK, now let’s move on to pie charts. A pie chart is a type of circular graph, used to show the relative contribution of different 
categories (which we see as slices), to make an overall total (which we see as a pie). Data points on a pie chart, that is, the slices, 
are represented as percentages of the complete pie. Pie charts provide a very simple visualization of differing data results, 
which we humans find very easy to comprehend. Pie charts are best used when you only have one data series, and when your data 
contains no more than maybe a dozen categories, otherwise the pie chart can start to look too busy and become difficult to read. 
For the pie chart, we’ll use the model names manufactured by Ford along with their unit sales.

To create our pie chart, we’ll select the data from 2 non-adjacent columns; in this case, “Model” and “Unit Sales”. 
Then we select Pie chart from 2-D Pie category of the Charts group. The new floating chart area contains our pie chart,
which displays the relative contribution of unit sales from individual Ford car models, which are the ‘slices’ of the pie,
and they combine together to make an overall total of unit sales of Ford cars, which is the whole ‘pie’. 
Let’s change the chart style to customize the look of the pie chart. There are numerous styles to choose from in the gallery 
and you can even make combinations of multiple styles; for example, here we’ve chosen style 3 and style 7, which gives us the 
percentage values displayed in each slice, and a nice dark contrasting background color. Let’s again move the chart, this time 
to the center of the worksheet below our data.

Lastly, let’s have a look at bar charts. A bar chart is a type of graph used to compare values across categories either 
using horizontal bars, or vertical bars in the case of column charts, which are a variety of bar charts. In a bar chart, 
the categories are usually arranged on the vertical axis, and the values are on the horizontal axis. Whereas, in a column chart, 
the categories are typically arranged on the horizontal axis, and the values are displayed on the vertical axis. 
To create our bar chart, we’ll select the data from 2 non-adjacent columns; in this case “Model” and “Retention %”.
Then we select a style of bar chart from the 2-D Bar category of Bar Charts.

The new floating chart area contains our bar chart, which displays comparative values for the retention percentage of the 
different Ford models using horizontal bars. Again, we can change the chart color to customize the look of the bar chart. 
If you just want to choose a color scheme based on a palette of colors, rather than a style, you can click the Change Colors 
button and then select a color palette from the list.

we learned how to create, line, pie, and bar charts in Excel.Next we’ll look at how to use the PivotChart feature in Excel.

Introduction to Creating Pivot Tables in Excel
 we’ll look at how to create and use Pivot Tables in Excel. We’ll first look at how to format our data as a table, 
then how to create Pivot Tables and use fields in a Pivot Table to analyze data, and lastly we’ll see how to perform
calculations in a Pivot Table. Having a worksheet full of informational data is all very well, but to really get some use 
out of it we need to analyze it from different perspectives to find answers to questions related to the data. 
Now, we’ve already used features such as filters and formulas to draw mathematical and logical conclusions about our data 
but not all questions can be answered easily using filters and formulas alone. In order to obtain usable and presentable 
insights into your data, you need something else… and that something else is Pivot Tables. 
Pivot Tables provide a simple and quick way, in spreadsheets, to summarize and analyze data, to observe trends and patterns
in your data and to make comparisons of your data. A Pivot Table is dynamic, so as you change and add data to the original dataset 
on which the Pivot Table is based, so the analysis and summary information changes too. A Data Analyst can use 
Pivot Tables to draw useful and relevant conclusions about, and create insights into, an organization’s data in order to
present those insights to interested parties within the company.

Before you start to create a Pivot Table in Excel, it can be very helpful to first format your data as a table. 
The reason for this is not only to make it more organized and defined and to add table styles to your data,
but primarily it makes it a lot easier when adding records to the dataset. In the car sales worksheet, 
let’s first select any cell within the data, and then on the Home tab, in the Styles group, choose ‘Format as Table’. 
Then, choose a style from the gallery. Note that Excel automatically knows the boundaries of our data range,
but we can change this if we need to. And ensure you select ‘My table has headers’, if indeed it does. 
After you click OK and the data has been formatted as a table, note the filter drop-downs at the top of each 
column – these are automatically added when you format as a table. If we now scroll down to the bottom of the table, 
and start adding another row of data for another vehicle, when you click Tab or Enter, note that it is automatically 
formatted and included as part of our table. OK, now let’s see how to create a basic Pivot Table, and 
how to use fields to arrange data in a Pivot Table. Just before we do that, there are a few things you should use 
as a checklist to ensure your data is in a fit state to make a Pivot Table from, and
these are: Format your data as a table for best results Ensure column headings are correct, and
there is only one header row, as these column headings become the field names in a Pivot Table 
Remove any blank rows and columns, and try to eliminate blank cells also Ensure value fields are formatted as numbers,
and not text Ensure date fields are formatted as dates, and not text

In the worksheet, we can just select any cell in the table. Then, on the Insert tab, we click PivotTable.
Note that in the ‘Select a table or range’ box, the table name – Table1 – is already entered for us. 
If we hadn’t just formatted this data as a table, we would specify the cell range here instead.
Under that, we need to decide whether we want to create the Pivot Table on a separate new blank worksheet,
or on this worksheet – a new worksheet is the default – and is the most commonly used option. So, a new blank worksheet 
opens, displaying some basic Pivot Table instructions in the graphic on the left of the worksheet, and a 
‘PivotTable Fields’ pane on the right. You can rename the worksheet for the Pivot Table if you wish. 
To build the Pivot Table report we need to add some fields from the top of the PivotTable Fields pane, 
to one or more of the sections in the bottom part of the pane. For example, if we want to find out the 
total sales for each model of car, let’s drag the Manufacturer field to the Rows section of the report
, and then we’ll drag the Model field there too. But this isn’t really the way we want it to look, 
so we’ll drag the Manufacturer field to appear at the top of the Rows section above the Model, which
makes more sense with our data. Next, we’ll add the Price field to the Columns section, but again that
really isn’t the way we want to view the data, so we’ll drag Price to the Values section instead, 
which makes a lot more sense and looks a lot better. Next, we’ll add the Unit Sales field to Values too, 
so now we can see both the individual price for each model and the number of unit sales of each model. 
Let’s add the Vehicle-type field to Columns, but that doesn’t seem very useful, so let’s remove that field, 
which we can do in two ways: Either by using the drop-down menu, 
or, if we undo that, we can also do it by simply dragging the field out of the Columns section,
either to the left over the worksheet, or to the top over the fields list above. Let’s now look at how to
perform a simple calculation in a Pivot Table. If we look in the ‘Sum of Price’ column in our Pivot Table,
we can see that the figures are formatted as General. So first, let’s change the format for these figures to US currency.
This can be done by modifying the value field settings for the field in the relevant section of the PivotTable Fields pane.
We’ll format the field as US dollars and show no decimal places. Next, we’ll add a calculated field
from the ‘PivotTable Analyze’ tab, using the ‘Fields, Items & Sets’ button. We want this field to calculate the
total sales for each model by multiplying the price by the number of unit sales. When we create and add this formula, 
it gets added to the PivotTable Fields pane, as a field called Total Model Sales. And we can change the format to make 
it US dollars again. A new column called ‘Sum of Total Model Sales’ has now appeared in the Pivot Table in our worksheet. 
In row 5, we can see that there have been over 360 million dollars of sales of the Acura Integra model, and in row 7,
we can see that there has been over a billion dollars in sales of the Acura TL model.

we learned how to format data as a table, how to create a Pivot Table and use fields to 
analyze data in a Pivot Table, and how to perform calculations using Pivot Table data. Next
we’ll look at some other features of Pivot Tables.


Using the Excel PivotChart Feature
Now that we’ve learned how to create a few basic types of charts in Excel, in this we’ll look at how to create 
some other basic charts using the PivotChart feature from a pivot table in Excel. We’ll first create area charts, 
and then column charts from a pivot table. 
A pivot chart is used to show the data series, categories, and chart axes the same way a basic chart is used,
but connecting a pivot table with it. Simply put, a pivot chart is nothing more than a graphical representation 
of a pivot table in Excel. It’s useful when we have a pivot table containing complicated data. A pivot chart can 
help us make sense of such data. Let’s start with area charts. An area chart is a type of graph, used to show 
information as a series of data points connected using straight lines with a filled area below it. Area charts
can handle both positive and negative values like line charts. First let’s create a copy of the Pivot1 worksheet 
of the car sales workbook. In this copied worksheet of the car sales workbook, let’s first filter the data of the 
pivot table to display only Toyota car models. If we expand the field “Toyota”, we can see the details of different
models from Toyota, such as the average price of each model, and the average year resale value.
Now let’s create an area chart using the PivotChart feature with this data. Here, let’s select the Area chart type, 
and choose the 3-D Area chart.

Here we see a floating chart containing our area chart, which displays the trend of average price
as well as average year resale value of Toyota cars across its models.

Note, that we can also filter the data in the pivot chart itself, rather than in the pivot table;
this is one of the key differences between a standard chart and a pivot chart. So, in our pivot chart,
let’s filter the data to display only Chevrolet car models.
When we expand the field, the pivot chart displays our data. Here we can see that it seems that the higher 
priced models don’t retain their value after one year compared to the lower priced models.

We can also use the Model filter drop-down in our pivot chart to filter on models too. 
Now we are only displaying 7 of the 9 Chevrolet models in our pivot chart and its associated pivot table.
So, we can see that when we make a change, such as adding a filter, directly in our pivot chart, those changes are 
immediately reflected in our pivot table data. And the reverse is obviously also true; if we make a change in our
pivot table, that change is immediately viewable in our pivot chart. Next, let’s have a look at column charts. 
A column chart is a type of graph used to compare values across categories using vertical bars. In a column chart, 
the categories are typically arranged on the horizontal axis, and the values are displayed on the vertical axis. 
To create our column chart, let’s first create another copy of the Pivot1 worksheet of the car sales workbook.

In this copied worksheet of the car sales workbook, let’s again filter the data of the pivot table; 
but this time to display only BMW, Cadillac and Hyundai car models.

Now let’s create a column chart using the PivotChart feature with this data. Here, let’s select the Column chart type, 
and choose the 3-D Clustered Column chart. The new floating chart area contains our column chart, which displays 
comparative values for the average price as well as the average year resale value for BMW, Cadillac and Hyundai cars using 
vertical bars. From this chart data, we can see that it seems that both the Hyundai and BMW ranges, retain their one-year 
resale value better than the Cadillac models do. Now let’s view all the BMW models in the table and chart by expanding the
cell in the pivot table. But note that we can also use the plus and minus buttons in the chart to expand and collapse the 
data view too. These buttons can drill-down and drill-up through multiple category levels if you have multiple fields 
in the Axis (or ‘Categories’) section of the PivotChart fields pane; for example if we had the models further categorized 
into model variants, and then into engine capacities, and then into colors, and so on. Now we can see all the models for 
all three manufacturers displayed in our column chart. Note, however that these buttons can only be used to expand or 
collapse all fields. If you want to expand or collapse just one field then you need to do it in the pivot table rather
than the chart, as we did in the previous step.

Let’s change the chart style to customize the look of the column chart. There are numerous styles to choose from in the gallery; 
for example, here we’ve chosen style 9, which gives us a nice dark contrasting background color.

we learned how to create area and column charts using the PivotChart feature from a pivot table in Excel.
We also learned how to filter data using either the pivot table or the pivot chart, and we learned how to expand and 
collapse data levels using both the pivot table and pivot chart. Next we’ll look at some advanced charts
available in Excel.

